SudekiMP recovery handoff
Updated: 2026-08-16 (America/New_York)

Repository:
  /var/home/wander/Documents/Projects/sudeki-mp

Supported game build:
  GOG build: 50303954381148403
  Executable: SUDEKI.exe
  SHA256: 8ceb1d3cf667ad906f13252cb5bdf762eb018ebbecb8bffeb92f3b27b0dfbb94
  Image base: 0x00400000

Safety state:
  - No Sudeki executable or archive is stored in this repository.
  - Runtime experiments remain disabled in config/SudekiMP.ini.
  - The vanilla install is read-only and separate from the working copy.
  - Emergency game stop: tools/stop-sudeki.sh
  - Research launches set Sudeki's native FullScreen option to False through
    tools/configure-windowed.sh. The first original PlayerOptions.xml is kept
    beside it as PlayerOptions.xml.sudekimp-backup.
  - The current checkpoint includes the Phase 9 attack proof plus disabled
    camera-relative movement, separation-guard, passive-target-trace, and
    live-confirmed midpoint-camera follow-ups.

Confirmed project position:
  1. Installer/build baseline, exact hashes, Wine baseline, and Ghidra import
     are complete.
  2. Milestone 1 is complete: Quick Menu can remain visible at normal world
     speed through an exact-build, disabled-by-default runtime change.
  3. The PE32 SudekiMP.dll/launcher foothold is complete and fails safely on
     unknown builds.
  4. Phase 5/Milestone 2 are complete for Elco Plasmatica. Activation,
     targeting handoff, animation events, projectile, collision damage,
     protection, cleanup, and independently adjustable caster/camera timing
     are traced.
  5. Phase 6 has working no-menu Skill Strike prototypes. Tal/Buki work through
     native QuickSkill input. Elco keys 5 through 9 were confirmed through the
     guarded ranged-state transition. Native consumables 1 through 4 already
     work. Ailish and Elco key 0 still need explicit coverage.
  6. Direct Spirit Strike is proven. A configurable key and automatic Ailish
     definition selection use native validation, transition, activation, SSP,
     animation, damage, and cleanup.
  7. Milestone 4 is complete: Buki AI can be disabled and restored independently
     while another character remains controlled.
  8. Milestone 5 is complete as a proof of concept: Player 1 retained normal
     W/A/S/D while I/J/K/L moved AI-overridden Buki through her own arbiter.
     The live-proven mode is still fixed to world axes and has no independent
     targeting, UI, or camera ownership.
  9. The per-character normal combat-input boundary is statically resolved.
     RVA 0x000DB0E0 accepts an explicitly chosen arbiter, Block in EAX, and
     five callee-cleaned states for Weak/Strong/Sweep/Weapon Next/Previous.
     The disabled U-key Buki weak-attack prototype passes ABI/exact-image
     tests and is live-confirmed: the user won a complete battle while one
     stable Buki arbiter repeatedly entered native IsAttacking bit 0x1000.
 10. With Buki AI disabled, party models visibly retained nearest-target
     lock-on. A passive trace confirmed Buki's target node stayed non-null and
     stable and auto targeting stayed enabled; entity identity and writer are
     still unresolved.
 11. Camera-relative Buki movement is live-confirmed. With Ailish retaining
     Player 1 camera focus, Buki's separate I/J/K/L movement rotated with the
     shared camera. The log recorded one stable Buki arbiter, changing world
     vectors for repeated local inputs, and clean AI restoration.
 12. The first non-teleporting separation guard is live-confirmed. World
     position resolves through character+0x44 to CPosition coordinates at
     +0x18/+0x1C/+0x20. At the 10-unit test limit it repeatedly blocked only
     outward movement and released inward/sideways movement immediately.
 13. Shared midpoint focus is live-confirmed. Standard gameplay used an
     OffsetTarget at CCamera+0xB4 and a GameObjectTarget at +0xB8. A disabled
     prototype creates Sudeki's native MatrixTarget, preserves Player 1's
     framing offset, and follows the Ailish/Buki midpoint. F10 restored Buki AI
     and native Ailish focus immediately. An initial R6025 restore failure
     proved the installer requires one caller-owned reference per slot; the
     corrected retain/install/release sequence completed cleanly. Zoom and a
     second rendered viewport were separate follow-ups.
 14. A first dual-viewport render proof is live-confirmed. An exact-build,
     disabled prototype replayed Sudeki's graphics phase into left/right D3D9
     viewports and the user captured both halves rendering gameplay in one
     process. Both halves still used the same native camera. The broad first
     hook also split the title/menu, duplicated the HUD, produced black
     shadow/visibility regions, and omitted some door geometry from view 2.
     A second build replayed only three world subpasses: shadows and doors were
     correct, but the menu still split and gameplay did not. The third build's
     active party/controller/game-camera gate fixed menu activation, but final-
     draw replay still corrupted shadows and the right-view door. Static work
     confirmed the final draw flushes shared callbacks. The fourth build
     advanced the render generation and replayed preparation at zero delta;
     player/NPC motion appeared frozen, shadows remained, and the door still
     vanished. That replay path is rejected. The prepared fifth build leaves
     the native frame untouched and duplicates its finished image after frame
     end as a safe compositor proof. Its live test passed: full-width menu and
     loading fade, normal actors, matching clean shadows, and the door present
     in both halves. The log recorded a clean 1368x768 compositor activation.
 15. Native Player 2 camera allocation/restoration is proven, but globally
     selecting the first construction is rejected. F9 created SudekiMP_P2 and
     restored the exact Ailish camera, yet the incomplete Player 2 state showed
     a skybox/improper view and held a doorway transition until restoration.
     Both diagnostic halves showed that same bad frame because the compositor
     duplicates one finished native image; it was not two independent failures.
 16. Static tracing separated gameplay camera ownership from render ownership.
     SetRenderCamera writes both CCameraManager+0x20 and the scene renderer's
     camera-state slot at scene_manager->+0x40->+0x7C. The prepared seventh
     experiment never changes CCameraManager+0x20. At render start only, it
     copies Ailish's valid render matrix into SudekiMP_P2, translates camera
     position by Buki minus Ailish world position, swaps only renderer+0x7C,
     and restores Ailish before native EndScene. Build and exact-image hook
     tests pass. The live test also passed: Buki framing was sensible, with no
     skybox, freeze, missing geometry, or doorway failure, and F9 restored
     Ailish cleanly. The doorway ended temporarily close to Buki because this
     proof inherits Ailish orientation/distance and translates only position.
 17. The alternating clean-frame prototype is live-confirmed. It alternates the proven Ailish
     and render-only Buki states across successive engine frames, caches each
     clean full-size image after EndScene, and composites Ailish-left/Buki-right.
     Sudeki still renders exactly once per engine frame; no simulation, culling,
     shadow, visibility, door, or draw callback is replayed. Each camera updates
     every other frame with at most one frame of cache age. The build and exact-
     image installation/restoration test pass. The user saw distinct Ailish-left
     and Buki-right views, no noticeable jitter, and otherwise normal rendering.
     Shared mouse rotation/zoom updated both while each stayed centered on its
     assigned character. The log recorded both caches active with one render per
     engine frame, maximum cache age one frame, and no compositor failure.
 18. --dual-camera-local-coop-test is live-confirmed. F10 successfully disabled
     Buki AI, I/J/K/L repeatedly moved one stable Buki arbiter camera-relative,
     and the distinct Ailish-left/Buki-right caches remained active. The guard
     repeatedly blocked outward motion and released inward motion. This is the
     first integrated local-coop proof with independent character movement and
     distinct assigned cameras. Shared camera input and duplicated HUD remain
     open ownership/presentation work.
 19. The duplicated Quit menu is fixed in the focused prototype. Exported
     CPCQuitScreenShow(bool) is RVA 0x0001DBE0, its singleton pointer is at
     RVA 0x00408D68, and the per-frame render path tests the visible byte at
     CPCQuitScreen+0x1C2. The exact-build gate keeps the last two valid camera
     textures, draws the frozen Ailish-left/Buki-right pair immediately before
     the native Quit render call at RVA 0x0028D572, and restores the complete
     D3D state before Sudeki draws one full-width interface. Back resumes both
     live cameras. Build and exact-image tests pass; the user confirmed the
     shared menu, frozen two-camera background, and clean gameplay return.
 20. Viewport-owned HUD character data and portrait art are live-confirmed.
     UIPortraitGroup/UIPortraitGizmo resolve party members through the intrusive
     pointer copy at RVA 0x000015B0. Confirmed HUD callsites are RVA 0x00181517
     (main numeric HP/SP), 0x000A9D5B (gizmo HP/SP), 0x000A9E15 (name), and
     0x000AACAB (status effects). The final binding resolves stable Ailish/Buki
     character identities to whichever live party slots currently contain
     them; it never rotates the party or changes controller/AI ownership. The
     user confirmed Ailish/1800 HP/240 SP and Ailish art on the left, with
     Buki/2400 HP/150 SP and Buki art on the right, including companion order.
     Gameplay HUD singleton RVA 0x003C2F9C owns four portrait gizmos at +0x138;
     each embeds UIElementCycleIcon at +0x2C. High-level refresh RVA 0x000AAB00
     was rejected because calling it every frame caused broader presentation
     side effects, and its asynchronous assignment initially left art blank.
     The accepted path maps the selected character through RVA 0x0003F430 and
     resource-index table RVA 0x002C2A94, then calls the narrow selector at RVA
     0x0015C070 synchronously. Natural refresh callsites remain unhooked.
 21. The brief unsplit/minimap pulse is fixed. Runtime logs proved Sudeki
     reverses Ailish/Buki party presentation order while the viewport HUD is
     active. Treating that exact same-character reversal as a true multiplayer
     reassignment removed/recreated Camera 2 and invalidated both frame caches
     every frame. Camera/HUD ownership now follows stable character identity,
     tolerates only that exact two-character reversal, and still fails safe for
     an actually different party. The final live test showed continuous split
     presentation and correct portraits; the log recorded one acquisition,
     `party_order_rotation phase=tolerated`, and no later release loop.
 22. The first real-time multiplayer Skill Strike build has had one incomplete
     live pass. It adds explicit P1/P2 combat contexts, uses Buki's own
     CSkill and ordered SkillData through the exact native availability,
     validation, and Use ABIs for F1-F4, and requires world-speed modes 0/0
     with pause byte 0. The one proven global targeting byte/node is serialized
     fail-safe: conflicting target-selection input is rejected, while a second
     character may begin after the first confirms and continues executing.
     Plasmatica SetRenderCamera at RVA 0x00036FB0 is inline-hooked only during
     its confirmed script call and routed to the caster's cached viewport;
     global camera ownership remains unchanged. Native cleanup also clears a
     stranded viewport override. PE32 build, combat-context test, private skill
     ABI test, inline-hook test, and exact-image install/restore test all pass.
     The cast completed without a crash, but acceptance failed: one mouse moved
     both views, Buki's viewport saw only Elco's first-person arm/gun, and the
     log proved native Plasmatica still changed shared game-speed modes from
     0/0 to 2/2 until cleanup. Do not claim real-time concurrency yet.
 23. The first Linux Player 2 controller bridge is live-confirmed for movement
     and input ownership. The Razer Raiju Mobile is visible at
     /dev/input/js0 but absent from Wine XInput/DirectInput even with Steam
     closed. The native helper queries joydev axis/button maps and sends a
     versioned 32-byte state to a Wine DLL receiver bound only to loopback.
     Stale input is neutralized after 250 ms. The controller left stick feeds
     Buki's proven camera-relative arbiter movement path with analog speed; A
     feeds Buki's proven weak-attack edge. Right stick/triggers/D-pad/buttons
     cross the protocol, but right stick is observation-only until independent
     Camera 2 rotation is understood. Actual Raiju map discovery, native self-
     test, Wine protocol/timeout tests, a real Linux-helper-to-Wine-receiver
     packet, PE32 build, context/ABI regressions, and exact-image hook
     installation/restoration all pass. In the castle save, keyboard/mouse
     retained Player 1 while the Raiju left stick independently moved Buki.
     One stable Buki character/arbiter received analog speed, camera-relative
     direction, and clean stop events. A also produced two native weak-attack
     submissions, but this non-combat save could not show the animation. An
     arena check remains for visible A-to-attack execution and disconnect
     neutralization; the independent physical input bridge itself is proven.

Independent Buki weak-attack test (LIVE-CONFIRMED):
  Confirmed static facts:
  - Character input handler RVA 0x000277B0 maps Weak/Strong/Sweep/Weapon
    Next/Previous/Block to action IDs 0x2C..0x31.
  - Controller combat consumer RVA 0x000286C0 calls RVA 0x000DB0E0 at
    RVA 0x0002891F with the chosen character's arbiter.
  - RVA 0x000DB0E0 entry signature:
    55 8B 6C 24 08 56 57 8B F8 8B F1
  - ABI: ECX=arbiter, EAX=Block; stack=Weak, Strong, Sweep, Weapon Next,
    Weapon Previous; native ret 0x14 cleans the stack arguments.
  - A one-shot weak request is state 1 with every other combat state zero.
  - Native owner, state, capability, weapon, transition, and targeting rules
    remain in control.

  Current code/test state:
  - EnableSecondPlayerWeakAttackPrototype=false by default.
  - [Bindings] SecondPlayerWeakAttack=U by default.
  - --second-player-attack-test uses F10 for Buki AI, I/J/K/L movement, U weak.
  - SudekiMP.ArbiterCombatInputTest.exe passes under Wine.
  - Call-hook, key-binding, and exact-image tests also pass.
  - Live log: stable Buki character/arbiter 0x07C861B0/0x07C86A80; repeated
    submissions changed arbiter+0x50 through 0x00001002. Exported
    CCharacterArbiter::IsAttacking() tests exactly flag 0x1000.
  - The user completed and won the battle with another Player 1 character.

Phase 9 shared-camera movement (LIVE-CONFIRMED):
  - EnableSecondPlayerCameraRelativeMovementPrototype=false by default.
  - --second-player-camera-movement-test uses native transform RVA 0x000291A0.
  - Transform signature: 55 8B EC 83 E4 F0 8B 55 08 D9 EE.
  - Ailish remained Player 1/camera focus while Buki moved relative to camera.
  - Stable live Buki character/arbiter: 0x08283F18 / 0x082847E8.
  - Repeated local directions produced changing normalized world directions as
    the shared camera rotated; Buki AI restored cleanly.

Separation guard (LIVE-CONFIRMED PROOF):
  - EnableSecondPlayerSeparationGuardPrototype=false by default.
  - SecondPlayerMaximumSeparation=10.0 is a test value, not final balance.
  - --second-player-separation-test enables camera-relative movement plus the
    outward-only limit. It never writes positions or forces catch-up.
  - Stable Buki character/arbiter: 0x083A5DA8 / 0x083A6678.
  - Repeated blocks occurred near distance-squared 100 for the 10-unit test
    value; every inward/within-limit direction produced a release.
  - EnableSecondPlayerTargetTrace=false by default.
  - --second-player-target-trace logs Buki CTargeter node/auto-target changes
    only and never calls targeting logic.
  - Live result: Buki's target node stayed non-null/stable and auto-target
    stayed enabled during the AI override; native AI restored cleanly.
  - An attempted resolved-target wrapper address was unstable and was removed
    from the diagnostic. Exact target identity and its writer remain open.
  - PE32 build and inert exact-image install/restore tests pass.
  - Do not launch another game test unless the user is available to confirm it.

Shared midpoint camera (LIVE-CONFIRMED PROOF):
  - EnableSharedGroupCameraPrototype=false by default.
  - --shared-group-camera-test enables F10 Buki override, camera-relative
    I/J/K/L movement, the 10-unit outward guard, and midpoint focus.
  - CGameCameraMode singleton global: RVA 0x00408DA8.
  - CGameCameraMode+0x0C points to CCamera+0x2C.
  - CCamera target slots: +0xB4/+0xB8.
  - GameObjectTarget vtable RVA 0x002D42CC.
  - OffsetTarget vtable RVA 0x002D436C.
  - MatrixTarget vtable RVA 0x002D43BC; size 0x80; owned matrix +0x20;
    cached translation +0x14; matrix pointer +0x60.
  - Native MatrixTarget create/list insertion: RVA 0x00134FB0.
  - Native CCamera target-slot installer: RVA 0x000E84C0.
  - Native zero-ref target release: RVA 0x00135340.
  - Live standard gameplay held OffsetTarget in slot 0 and GameObjectTarget in
    slot 1. The prototype accepts that exact pair plus the native same-
    GameObjectTarget case. It preserves the slot-0 framing transform and moves
    its translation by the P1-to-midpoint delta.
  - The native target installer expects its caller to retain once per installed
    slot. Missing those two retains let the first restore destroy MatrixTarget
    while slot 1 still referenced it, producing R6025 pure virtual function
    call. Adding a slot-owned reference before each acquire and restore install
    fixed the lifetime and produced a complete clean release sequence.
  - The user confirmed visible Ailish/Buki midpoint tracking and immediate
    return to Ailish focus when Buki AI was restored.
  - Warning-clean PE32 build, SudekiMP.CameraTargetAbiTest.exe, launcher
    exact-build check, and inert exact-image install/restore test pass.
  - The prototype changes focus only. It remains the single-screen fallback.
    The separate split-screen branch now has a same-camera render-twice proof;
    independent viewport camera ownership is still unimplemented.

Dual-viewport rendering (LIVE-CONFIRMED, ARTIFACT-LIMITED PROOF):
  - EnableSplitScreenRenderPrototype=false by default.
  - --split-screen-render-test enables only this exact-build experiment.
  - D3D device global: RVA 0x003C31DC.
  - Main frame/render loop: RVA 0x0028D3F0.
  - Frame begin/end: RVA 0x001DD200 / 0x001DD540.
  - Graphics render phase: RVA 0x001D4750; renderer in EAX, world context in
    EDI, no stack arguments.
  - Primary graphics-phase call RVA 0x0028D473 produces the visible gameplay
    split but is also used by menu presentation.
  - Conditional world-subpass calls RVA 0x0000A62D, 0x0000A689, and
    0x0000A738 remain single-run in the current build.
  - First live log divided a 1368x768 viewport into two 684-pixel halves. A
    1920x1080 user capture visibly confirmed the split.
  - Both halves currently reuse the same selected native camera. There is no
    independent Player 2 camera, aspect/projection ownership, or per-player UI.
  - First-run defects: title/menu split, duplicated HUD, large black shadow or
    visibility regions, and some doors missing in view 2.
  - Second live run replayed only the three subpasses: no black shadows, the
    door rendered correctly, menu remained split, and gameplay did not split.
    This disproved the earlier call-scope classification.
  - Third live run: title/menu full-width, gameplay split, and the log changed
    from gameplay_gate inactive to active. Black shadow figures/regions and the
    missing right-view door returned. The gate is confirmed; draw-only replay
    is invalid.
  - Main primary sequence: first RVA 0x001D48C0 at call RVA 0x0028D45B,
    middle RVA 0x001D4820 at 0x0028D46B, final RVA 0x001D4750 at 0x0028D473.
  - Render-generation uint16 global: RVA 0x003C3150. Frame begin increments it;
    per-object generation fields suppress duplicate preparation.
  - Final helper flushes shared callback queues through RVA 0x00226F30 ->
    0x00226E90; the same queue path carries cShadowRenderCallback.
  - Fourth live run incremented the render generation and reran first/middle
    with zero delta. Player and NPC motion appeared frozen, black shadows
    remained, and the door still vanished in one view. Reject render replay.
  - Prepared fifth build hooks only frame-end call RVA 0x0028D58C. It runs the
    native frame completely unchanged, copies render target 0 after frame end,
    then scales the finished image into two halves during the proven gameplay
    gate. Both halves deliberately duplicate the same camera and HUD.
  - The focused launcher temporarily sets native AntiAliasing to 0 and restores
    the prior numeric value when the game exits. The compositor fails safe to
    the native full-width frame if any D3D9 surface/copy operation fails.
  - Expanded render_phase_abi_test and inert exact-image install/restore test
    pass in an isolated 32-bit Wine prefix. Do not claim independent cameras or
    per-player HUD ownership yet.
  - Fifth live result passed: title/menu remained full-width through the load
    fade; gameplay split only after activation; player/NPC motion was normal;
    shadows matched; and the door rendered in both copies. The log recorded
    compositor_active at 1368x768, format 21, multisample 0 with no failure.
  - Live-tested --second-player-render-camera-test. F9 selected the distinct
    named camera and F9 again restored the exact original Ailish camera; both
    switches are confirmed in the log. Native ownership/restoration works.
  - The Camera 2 framing path is rejected: "default" plus a translated target
    matrix showed a skybox/improper view, not a normal Buki gameplay camera.
    Both halves displayed it only because this diagnostic compositor duplicates
    the one selected native frame; the restored Player 1 camera remained valid.
    Entering the castle while Camera 2 remained globally selected held Player 1
    in the doorway transition while NPCs continued; restoring Ailish with F9
    immediately returned normal animation/control.
  - Do not alternate the global render camera across simulation frames. Static
    tracing confirmed SetRenderCamera writes gameplay ownership at manager+0x20
    separately from renderer camera state at scene_manager->+0x40->+0x7C.
  - Live-confirmed seventh build: F9 leaves manager+0x20 on Ailish, copies Ailish's
    valid render matrix into SudekiMP_P2, translates only its camera position by
    Buki-minus-Ailish, swaps renderer+0x7C during rendering, and restores Ailish
    before native EndScene. The user observed a proper Buki-centered view with
    no skybox, freeze, missing geometry, or doorway failure. Both halves still
    duplicate the selected finished image; this is render isolation/framing,
    not simultaneous output. The close post-doorway framing remains future
    per-player offset/smoothing work.
  - Live-confirmed Quit-menu solution: CPCQuitScreen+0x1C2 gates one native
    full-width interface. The pre-Quit hook draws the last valid Ailish/Buki
    texture pair beneath it, so the paused background retains both player views
    rather than switching to Ailish-only. Back returns to live split gameplay.

Windowed/recording setup:
  - tools/run-wine.sh --windowed selects native windowed mode; --fullscreen is
    the explicit fallback.
  - continue-research.sh uses --windowed --obs-gamecapture for live research.
  - Existing Lutris config uses prefix_command: obs-gamecapture. SudekiMP now
    applies that exact wrapper to Wine as well.
  - Host i686/x86_64 obs-vkcapture hooks are installed. Flatpak OBS has the
    OBSVkCapture 1.5.6 extension and exposes its Game Capture source.
  - Start OBS first, add the OBSVkCapture Game Capture source, then launch
    Sudeki so the preload exists from process startup. PipeWire window capture
    is only the fallback. See docs/recording.md.
  - Live launcher output confirmed Init GLX 1.5.1 (32bit). OBS preview itself
    is not yet explicitly user-confirmed.

Free-roam camera research (NOT solved):
  Confirmed static facts:
  - GetCameraManager: RVA 0x00038C40; manager global RVA 0x00409D7C.
  - CCameraManager::LoadConfig: RVA 0x000375F0.
  - CCameraManager::SetCameraConfig: RVA 0x00037CD0.
  - CCamera::GetConfigFloat: RVA 0x000E8D50.
  - CGroupPlayers::InCombat(): RVA 0x00004FA0; reads group byte +0xD4.
  - Character input handler: RVA 0x000277B0.
  - CameraU/CameraD action IDs: 0x69/0x6A; handler stores their float payloads
    at controller +0x184/+0x188.
  - Weapon wheel action IDs: 0x2F/0x30.
  - PlayerOptions.xml binds CameraU/CameraD to mouse Y and weapon next/previous
    to the two wheel directions.
  - DEFAULT exploration config contains default/min/max/absolute-max distances
    3.5/3.5/6.2/8.5 and user-distance scale 8.0. Combat uses
    6.0/6.0/10.0/10.0.

  Failed or inconclusive live experiments:
  - Directly remapping wheel events to CameraU/CameraD produced no visible zoom.
    Wheel notches carried real +/-12.0 float payloads, followed immediately by
    zero events.
  - Holding the remapped pulse for 50 ms still produced no visible zoom.
  - Queueing wheel steps and injecting +/-1.0 into controller +0x184/+0x188
    after controller update logged correctly but still did not move the camera.
  - A LeftCtrl modifier gate detected every Ctrl press and used the engine's
    non-combat branch, but the user still observed no useful camera response.
    The exact player/camera state was not independently classified beyond
    CGroupPlayers::InCombat() == false, so retain a small state ambiguity.

  Current code state:
  - EnableFreeRoamCameraModifierPrototype is disabled by default.
  - --freeroam-camera-test enables the unconfirmed LeftCtrl gate only.
  - Do not describe the camera as fixed and do not ship this prototype enabled.

  Correct next camera investigation:
  1. Start from a vanilla run where mouse Y visibly changes distance.
  2. Trace/watch the actual desired/current camera-distance value while moving
     mouse Y; controller +0x184/+0x188 are only input staging, not the durable
     control point.
  3. Identify the active camera object/profile and the update function that
     reads ExplorationUserDistanceScale and clamps min/max/absolute max.
  4. Confirm gameplay state with active camera/profile plus group combat byte,
     rather than using InCombat() as the only free-roam definition.
  5. Implement one direct, reversible desired-distance adjustment and only then
     choose wheel, modifier, wider range, pitch, or near-third-person behavior.
  6. A true camera revamp may be warranted for multiplayer: shared focus,
     separation bounds, collision, transitions, scoped ranged views, skill
     cinematics, and eventual per-viewport ownership all need explicit policy.

SudekiForge / model and world-authoring direction:
  - Prefer a separate sibling repository named sudeki-forge under a shared
    parent directory. SudekiMP should consume stable formats/libraries rather
    than becoming a combined reverse-engineering, editor, and multiplayer tree.
  - Maya is capable of professional polygon/NURBS/subdivision modeling,
    rigging, animation, layout, effects, and large scene/world authoring.
  - Maya does NOT solve Sudeki import/export by itself. The hard work is still
    decoding Sudeki model, skeleton, animation, material, collision, archive,
    navmesh, trigger, and world/scene formats, then writing converters.
  - Maya 2026 officially supports specific RHEL releases on Linux and its
    licensing has additional Linux library/display constraints. This is less
    convenient on a non-RHEL desktop.
  - Blender should be the primary first target: it is free/open source,
    cross-platform, scriptable with Python, contributor-friendly, and suitable
    for a custom Sudeki importer/exporter or add-on.
  - Maya can remain an optional authoring frontend for artists who already own
    and know it. Keep SudekiForge's intermediate representation independent of
    either DCC so Blender, Maya, and future tools can share converters.
  - Neither Blender nor Maya is automatically a complete Sudeki world editor.
    Long-term world building likely needs a Blender add-on or dedicated
    SudekiForge scene editor for collision, spawn points, triggers, doors,
    scripts, nav data, cameras, and archive packaging.

  Current official references checked on 2026-08-14:
  https://www.autodesk.com/products/maya/overview.htm
  https://help.autodesk.com/view/MAYAUL/2026/ENU/?caas=caas/sfdcarticles/sfdcarticles/System-Requirements-for-Autodesk-Maya-2026.html
  https://help.autodesk.com/cloudhelp/2026/ENU/Maya-Installlation/files/GUID-D2B5433C-E0D2-421B-9BD8-24FED217FD7F.htm
  https://www.blender.org/

Recommended next work after the pause:
  A. If returning to SudekiMP gameplay first:
     - The render-only Buki framing and doorway-isolation test has passed.
     - The alternating frame-cache test also passed with distinct Ailish/Buki
       views and no noticeable jitter or rendering regression.
     - Integrated dual-camera movement and the shared full-width Quit-menu
       overlay have passed. HUD name, HP, SP, companion ordering, and portrait
       art are live-confirmed per viewport. Stable camera identity now tolerates
       Sudeki's internal Ailish/Buki order reversal without an unsplit/minimap
       pulse. The Raiju/keyboard ownership and independent Buki movement test
       passed. Repeat --controller-bridge-test in a combat save only to see A
       execute Buki's already-logged weak attack and verify disconnect
       neutralization. Then isolate right-stick Camera 2 rotation before
       returning to Plasmatica.
       SSP remains party-wide unless later evidence disproves that model.
  B. If returning to the camera first:
     - Keep the shared midpoint camera as a single-screen fallback.
     - Follow the desired-distance writer plan above only after the split
       replay path is stable; do not iterate on CameraU/CameraD staging fields
       again without new evidence.
  C. If starting SudekiForge:
     - Inventory SOLData.baf/model-related names and signatures without copying
       assets into git.
     - Pick one small model and establish container, mesh, vertex/index,
       material, skeleton, and transform facts.
     - Export first to a neutral research representation, then build a Blender
       importer. Attempt write-back only after round-trip invariants are known.

Resume commands:
  cd /var/home/wander/Documents/Projects/sudeki-mp
  git status --short
  tools/continue-research.sh --check
  tools/continue-research.sh --safe
  tools/continue-research.sh --controller-bridge-test
  tools/continue-research.sh --realtime-skill-coop-test

Primary detailed records:
  docs/research-log.md
  docs/milestones.md
  docs/engine-functions.md
  docs/structures.md
  docs/combat.md
  docs/mod-loader.md

Latest focused finding (2026-08-16):
  - The current visual issue is Ailish as Player 2, not Elco and not missing
    weapon setup. The log shows Ailish's weapon already equipped, the P2
    presentation attached to the world wrapper with first_person_active=0, and
    combat input changing the world animation selectors. The unresolved issue
    is the per-viewport ranged presentation/pose boundary; the raw P2
    first-person-wrapper attachment remains rejected after the exact-build
    renderer crash at RVA 0x0021BF17.
  - A cleanroom spawned-actor combat-transition refresh remains an exploratory,
    unconfirmed diagnostic only. Do not treat it as the Ailish fix. The next
    pass should capture Ailish P2 combat entry and a wand action, comparing
    world-wrapper and first-person animation state/clock without changing
    weapon setup or global camera ownership.
  - The control-separation handoff now requests one guarded native combat-arm
    refresh after a verified AI-to-Player-2 override. The first rebuilt run
    confirmed the native refresh path, but it used Ailish P1/Tal P2 and is not
    an Ailish-P2 visual acceptance result. Keep the required Tal P1/Ailish P2
    wand test separate.

Prepared ranged-readiness pass (2026-08-16):
  - In the Ailish-lead/Tal-P2 cleanroom run, Combat Mode enabled movement but
    Ailish could not normal-fire until one Skill Strike initialized her native
    ranged action state; normal fire worked afterward.
  - The new exact-gated prototype reuses native UI transition RVA 0x0000AFD0,
    holds it for the validated 75 ms game-thread cycle, then exits with the
    native false transition. It runs on combat entry and after verified Player
    2 ownership handoff, and writes no animation, weapon, arbiter, camera, or
    time state.
  - PE32 build, CleanroomEngineTest, SkillTraceImageTest, shell syntax, and
    git diff --check pass. Live Tal-P1/Ailish-P2 validation is pending.

Confirmed first-person-only fallback (2026-08-16):
  - The exact-build Ailish-lead cleanroom capture completed idle, electric
    weapon, and return-to-idle actions. First-person IDs 0x8C, 0x8E, 0xC1,
    0xC2, and 0xC3 have a 0x0007FFFF second resource handle; the remaining
    handle fails the world-wrapper lookup. The observer path therefore copies
    first-person selectors 2, 4, 8, 9, and 10 into the world wrapper.
  - This explains the animated-but-idle body and electric multi-animation
    cycle. It is a presentation-resource mapping failure, not a missing
    readiness prime. No selector map has been installed.
  - Next required experiment: Tal Player 1/Ailish Player 2 using the same
    actions, to capture native third-person IDs/selectors before mapping.

  - That control case is now live-confirmed: Tal Player 1/Ailish Player 2
    plus `U` produced Ailish world `animation_id=0x87`, selector `55`, with
    `first_person_active=0`. This proves the world action exists and the
    defect is restricted to Ailish Player 1 observer translation. The pair is
    a weak-attack correlation only; do not apply it to the electric sequence
    until that sequence is captured in both roles.

Upper-body pitch-seam checkpoint (2026-08-16):
  - REJECTED: applying camera pitch to Ailish's complete world root pivots the
    whole model from her feet (the live "seahorse toy" result). Keep that write
    disabled.
  - CONFIRMED: 13 neutral/up/down samples resolved only WeaponFollow, Staff1,
    and WeaponParent through the named-locator provider; all three matrices
    were invariant and skeletal waist/backbone/arm names were absent.
  - CONFIRMED: 15 renderer samples across pitch -0.52360..+0.26599 left
    configuration slot 3 and logical channel 4 invariant. Normal fire instead
    uses first-person channels 0 and 2. Neither audited route carries the
    continuous upper-body pitch.
  - CONFIRMED STATIC LIMIT: StateDetails+0x59 bit 0x08 is loaded from the
    authored `Upper body` property, but exact-image review found no confirmed
    runtime consumer. Do not patch or infer a mask from it.
  - NEXT: make one read-only runtime resource inventory for authored aim IDs
    0x97/0x98/0x99 against both first-person and saved-world wrappers. Do not
    call the state machine, play selectors, or write animation/pose state.
